Discovery basics: Data Sharing (#36)
mastodon/fediverse_auxiliary_service_provider_specifications: discovery/data_sharing/v0.1/data_sharing.md

# "Fediscovery": Data Sharing Specification

## Overview

Specification identifier: `data_sharing`

In order to be able to present results, discovery providers need to be
able to request content from connected fediverse servers. Two different
concerns need to be distinguished: Retrieving new content as it is
created and retrieving historic content to backfill search indexes.

## Restrictions On Content Being Shared

A single FASP will never be used by all fediverse servers. To ensure it
still gets a broad view not limited to a small number of servers,
fediverse servers MUST share not only local but also remote content with

> the FASP.

Reviewer: This may be contentious, especially around the lack of Data Processing Agreements being in place here. i.e., could be a potential legal nightmare.

Author: We already mandate that every Specification MUST include this. It is just that I am not sure if this even applies here :confused:

Author: I made an issue out of this #36.

Since this may result in multiple servers sharing the same content with
a single FASP, FASPs MUST deduplicate content.

As a single server is not authoritative for all the content shared and
to save bandwidth only URIs of content are actually exchanged with the
FASP. The FASP is then responsible for retrieving the content and
working with it. The exact details of this differ between capabilties
and are described in the respective sections.

A fediverse server MUST make sure it only shares content that it is
actually allowed to share. It MUST NOT share any content that is not

> public. In the case of account and post data it MUST make sure to only

Reviewer: what about unlisted?

Author: I added a bit about this in the latest commit. I am still not 100% sure if this is sufficient, but it should be better than before.

share content where the creator has opted in to discovery.

The FASP in turn MUST also ensure that creators have opted in to

> discovery before storing and indexing content.

Reviewer: What happens if this value changes? Should we send events to say "hey, this actor is now discoverable" or "that actor is now no longer discoverable" ?

Author: I added a paragraph at the end describing the need to periodically refetch the content. As an interval I chose one week as I think this is the interval after which mastodon considers an object to be stale.

Author: Yes and this is all part of the spec already, *but* as always the server talking to the FASP might not know about these things if they happen on third-party server. It should, but there are no guarantees.

Hence we will need both: Servers announcing changes to FASP and FASP rechecking content regularly.

Both parties MUST use the mechanism described in
[FEP-5feb](https://codeberg.org/fediverse/fep/src/branch/main/fep/5feb/fep-5feb.md)
to determine if a creator has opted in to discovery.

For account data, both parties MUST ensure the `discoverable` flag is
set to `true`.

## Subscribing To, Requesting And Receiving Content

### Managing Subscriptions (FASP => Fediverse Server)

In order to subscribe to new content, FASPs can subscribe to events
by making a `POST` call to the `/data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions`
endpoint on the fediverse server.

Example call:

```http
POST /data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions

> ```

Reviewer: Requests to this should also include an endpoint relative to the FASP such that you know where to send the content (much like with Webhooks)

Author: Moved this to an issue here: #40

The request body MUST contain a JSON object defining what events to
subscribe to. This object MUST contain the keys `objectType` and
`eventType`. It MAY contain the keys `maxBatchSize` and/or

> `threshold`. The keys are defined as follows:

Reviewer: `objectType` and `eventType` aren't in the list below, nor the example?

* `category`: One of `content`, `account`. This is the category of

>   objects the FASP is interested in.

Reviewer: Is this `objectType`? i.e., Actor, Post, Media, etc?

Author: It was at some point, but then we decided against it (hence the change from `objectType` to `category`). At this point we do not expect FASPs to handle different types of content very differently, so it does not seem to make much sense having separate subscriptions for them.

This is also more flexible as the fediverse software can decide what it considers "content" worth indexing and the FASP can decide if and how to handle different types.

* `subscriptionType`: One of `lifecycle`, `trends`. `lifecycle`
  means the FASP would like to be notified when new objects of the given
  type are created, when objects are updated and when objects are
  deleted. `trends` means that the FASP would like to be notified of
  objects that had recent interactions. `trends` is only applicable if

>   the `category` given is `content`.

Reviewer: Don't we have trending accounts that are server local?

Author: I thought so too (and thus did not have this restriction on `trends` initially), but apparently we do not.

What we do have is account recommendations and we would like to tackle that topic as well, but this is not dependent on anything currently "trending".

* `maxBatchSize`: The maximum number of events the FASP would like to
  receive in a single request. This is optional.

> * `threshold`: If `eventType` is `trending` then this object can be used to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `threshold`: If `subscriptionType` is `trends` then this object can be used to
```

I think?

Author: Yes, thanks!

  further specify when the event should be reported. Valid keys for this
  object are:
  * `timeframe`: Number of minutes in which interactions should fire an
    event, defaults to `15`
  * `shares`: Number of shares in the given timeframe, defaults to `3`
  * `likes`: Number of likes in the given timeframe, defaults to `3`
  * `replies`: Number of replies in the given timeframe, defaults to `3`

Example object:

```json
{
  "category": "content",
  "subscriptionType": "trends",
  "maxBatchSize": 10,
  "threshold": {
    "timeframe": 15,
    "shares": 3
  }
}
```

The fediverse server MUST validate the request. If it is invalid it MUST

> return an HTTP status code `422` (Unprocessable Content).

Reviewer: Should it return different errors for different things? e.g., 400 if the payload isn't just, 422 if the schema isn't correct, and 401 if the http signatures don't validate?

Author: The latter is already part of the "general" spec. Do we need the distinction between 400 and 422? I have no idea :confused:

Reviewer: There's possibly also 429, or 409 (conflict) for when a FASP already has a subscription that matches this subscription.

Author: I opened an issue for this so it is not forgotten: #39

If it is valid the response from the fediverse server MUST include an
HTTP status code `201` (Created) and a JSON object including the `id` of
the generated subscription. The latter can be used to unsubscribe later.

Example response object:

```json
{

>   "subscriptionId": 3446

Reviewer: I'd generally suggest using an object here:
```suggestion
  "subscription": {
    "id": "3446"
  }
```

(I'm thinking subscription IDs may be bigints, so should probably be strings.

Reviewer: That way if we need to add more properties to the response later, then it's much easier to do so.

Author: Good idea, thanks!

}
```

To unsubscribe the FASP can make an HTTP `DELETE` call to the
`/data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions/:id` endpoint, where `:id` is replaced
with the ID received when the original subscription was created.

Example call:

```http
DELETE /data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions/3446
```

> The response MUST be an HTTP status code `200` (OK).

Reviewer: what about 204 No Content?

Author: Yes, that is probably better, thanks.

### Requesting Historic Content / Backfilling (FASP => Fediverse Server)

To request historic content to index a FASP can make an HTTP `POST` call
to the `/data_sharing/v0/backfill_requests` endpoint.

Example call:

```http
POST /data_sharing/v0/backfill_requests
```

The request body MUST contain a JSON object with the following keys:

* `category`: One of `content`, `account`. This is the category
  of objects the FASP is interested in.
* `maxCount`: An integer representing the maximum number of objects the
  FASP would like to receive.
* `cursor`: Optional. An opaque token received from the fediverse server
  in a previous request. MUST be used by the fediverse server to

>   determine results that have not already been sent to the FASP.

Reviewer: Once again, how does the Fediverse server know where to send the results to?

Author: That is explained below.

Example object:

```json
{
  "category": "content",
  "maxCount": 100,
  "cursor": "1541815103606536472"
}
```

The response from the fediverse server MUST include an HTTP status code
`201` (Created) and a JSON object including the `id` of the generated
backfill request.

Example response object:

```json
{
  "backfillRequestId": 672
}
```

### Sending Content (Fediverse Server => FASP)

Both the occurrence of an event that a FASP has subscribed to and the
fulfillment of a backfill request, MUST be announced to the FASP by the
fediverse server with an HTTP `POST` call to the FASP's
`/data_sharing/v0/announcements` endpoint.

Example call:

```http

> POST /data_sharing/v0/announcements

Author: I think I answered this above. Just to reiterate: I agree these are valid concerns but I would prefer to tackle those in a later version when we have some practical experience.

```

The request body MUST include a JSON object including the keys
`source`, `objectType` and `objectUris`.

* `source` lets the FASP know in reply to which of its request this
  announcement is sent. It MUST include an object with either a

>   `subscriptionId` or a `backfillRequestId`.

Reviewer: Would once again recommend:
```
source: {
  type: "subscription" | "backfill_request"
  id: "1234567"
}
```

Author: I think it would be more consistent this way:

```json
"source": {
  "subscription": {
    "id": "132542"
  }
}
```

I just pushed a change to that effect but am still  open to alternatives.

MUST only be included with the final request, but only if more data
would be available.

Example payload:

```json
{
  "source": {
    "subscriptionId": 58152
  },
  "eventType": "new",
  "objectType": "Note",
  "objectUris": [
    "https://fediverse-server.example.com/@example/2342",
    "https://fediverse-server.example.com/@other/8726"
  ]
}
```

## Retrieving Content From Its Origin (FASP => Wider Fediverse)

As displayed in the sections above, FASP will only receive object URIs
from connected fediverse servers. They will then need to fetch the
actual content themselves.

To do so, they need to send HTTP `GET` requests to the object URIs with
an `Accept` header with the `application/ld+json;
profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams"` media type as specified
by [ActivityPub](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#retrieving-objects).

These requests MUST be signed. To achieve a maximum of compatibility
with existing fediverse software, FASP MUST support request signing with
both "HTTP Message Signatures" as defined by
[RFC-9421](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9421.html) as well as the
earlier draft version "HTTP Signatures" as defined by

> [cavage-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cavage-http-signatures).

Author: Yes, as stated below, though I should probably mention webfinger.

> [cavage-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cavage-http-signatures).

Author: Having re-checked I wonder: Do we really need webfinger here? The keyId used for signatures already points to the actor JSON, so in theory no webfinger lookup should be necessary.

> [cavage-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cavage-http-signatures).

Reviewer: I don't think so. I think we could just say that you need to request back the actor at that URL following the process defined in: https://swicg.github.io/activitypub-http-signature/#how-to-verify-a-signature

> [cavage-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cavage-http-signatures).

Reviewer: i.e., don't this we necessarily need to specific information that is specified in that spec here.

> [cavage-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cavage-http-signatures).

Author: I tried to implement this to work against a mastodon server and yes a whole lot more is needed than I had initially hoped, including webfinger. I updated the document accordingly.

To find out which version a given fediverse server supports, FASP should
implement "double-knocking": They should first attempt a request using
"HTTP Message Signatures" and if the fediverse server replies with an
HTTP status code of `401` or `403` make a second attempt with the older

> draft version, "HTTP Signatures".

Reviewer: Why not just always require sending signatures? If the server doesn't need them, it'll discard them. That'll reduce request loads by half.

Author: We do require that, we just propose to try the final version before falling back to the draft one.

They use the same HTTP header and thus cannot both be used at the same time. I included a link to the SWICG document about this and this is basically their recommendation I just followed here.

Reviewer: I'd probably move the link to the SWICG report up, and perhaps we can do some clarifications to that report, e.g., "How to send requests with signatures" which is kind of mentioned, but saying "follow this process, but do double knocking" (i.e., try latest spec, if that fails, try cavage-12). This is kinda awkwardly placed in that document.

and use that one directly when accessing objects the next time. In case
a server supports the older version, "HTTP Signatures", the newer one
MUST be retried periodically, i.e. the cache should be invalidated.

More information about HTTP signatures and "double-knocking" can be
found in this report:
[ActivityPub and HTTP Signatures](https://swicg.github.io/activitypub-http-signature/).

In both protocol versions, FASP MUST act as an "server/instance actor".
This means that the `keyId` given MUST be a URI that can be used to
fetch the JSON-LD representation of an ActivityPub Actor that represents
the FASP. This actor information MUST include the public key that can
be used to verify the signature.

The URI's path MUST be `/actor` and a minimal JSON response might look
like this:

```json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
    "https://w3id.org/security/v1",
  ],
  "id": "<Base URL>/actor",
  "type": "Application",
  "publicKey": {
    "id": "<Base URL>/actor#main-key",
    "owner": "<Base URL>/actor",
    "publicKeyPem": "<Public key PEM>"
  }
}
```

`<Base URL>` MUST be replaced with the base URL of the FASP, `<Public

> key PEM` with its public key used for signing.

Author: Good questions. I believe it is confusing that this here seems to re-use some terms that are already defined in the "general" spec and pertain to the FASP<->fediverse server relationship _for the case where a fediverse server is registered with and uses FASP directly_.

These here are guidelines for how a FASP could communicate with the other fediverse servers that do not necessarily know about the FASP and/or do not use it themselves.

So the "Base URL" is just _a_ URL in this example. I might replace it with an "actual" example URL using `example.com` or something.

The public key is indeed different from any of the keypairs exchanged with registered fediverse servers and I should make this more clear.

> key PEM` with its public key used for signing.

Author: I tried to make this clearer.

fediverse servers MUST share not only local but also remote content with
the FASP.

Since this may result in multiple servers sharing the same content with
a single FASP, FASPs MUST deduplicate content.

As a single server is not authoritative for all the content shared and
to save bandwidth only URIs of content are actually exchanged with the
FASP. The FASP is then responsible for retrieving the content and
working with it. The exact details of this differ between capabilties
and are described in the respective sections.

A fediverse server MUST make sure it only shares content that it is
actually allowed to share. It MUST NOT share any content that is not
public. In the case of account and post data it MUST make sure to only
share content where the creator has opted in to discovery.

The FASP in turn MUST also ensure that creators have opted in to
discovery before storing and indexing content.

Both parties MUST use the mechanism described in
[FEP-5feb](https://codeberg.org/fediverse/fep/src/branch/main/fep/5feb/fep-5feb.md)
to determine if a creator has opted in to discovery.

For account data, both parties MUST ensure the `discoverable` flag is

> set to `true`.

Author: Note that `discoverable` is for the account itself. For statuses we rely on `indexable` as explained (in probably too little detail) in the paragraph right before this one.

## Subscribing To, Requesting And Receiving Content

### Managing Subscriptions (FASP => Fediverse Server)

In order to subscribe to new content, FASPs can subscribe to events
by making a `POST` call to the `/data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions`

> endpoint on the fediverse server.

Reviewer: We should also add a `GET /data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions` to retrieve back all of the current subscriptions that a FASP has to a server.

Likewise, there should probably be some sort of notification if the Fediverse server disconnects the FASP.

Author: > We should also add a `GET /data_sharing/v0/event_subscriptions` to retrieve back all of the current subscriptions that a FASP has to a server.

This is a good idea, I opened an issue for this: #43

> Likewise, there should probably be some sort of notification if the Fediverse server disconnects the FASP.

The current specifications are (intentionally) very bare-bones and I agree that something like this is missing. The whole registration process and capability selection probably need some love so that both parties are always in sync with each other. Similarly we will need a way to "properly" disconnect two parties and maybe even some specification about how to handle failure modes (e.g. short-term vs. long-term connectivity issues).

Opened #44 for this.

is is *not* one of the private keys used to authenticate with a
registered fediverse server as defined in [FASP/Fediverse Server
Interaction](../../general/v0.1/) but part of a separate key pair FASP
MUST generate for this purpose.

FASP MUST include the content shown above in their actor JSON but MAY
add further information.

Note that the JSON shown above is not a valid ActivityPub actor because
it is missing an "inbox" and an "outbox". The information contained is enough
to verify signatures though and it seems preferrable to not confuse
anyone with "fake" in- and outboxes. But this is subject to change if it
turns out that fediverse software exists that only accepts fetch
requests from actors that do have an inbox and an outbox.

Once indexed or persisted in any way, FASP MUST periodically re-check
both content and account data. At least once every week FASP MUST
revalidate that the content / account is still publicly available and
still allowed to be indexed. If the content has been changed these
changes MUST be applied in the FASPs data storage as well. If FASP have
been notified of changes through their subscriptions they MAY suspend

> the periodical check for this object for the next week.

Author: Yes, I worry about this as well. But is this really worse than for example "regular" search engine crawlers?

> the periodical check for this object for the next week.

Author: Oh, and I forgot to repeat that we already do updates and deletes, but as is so often the case on the fediverse we might not know about them. Since privacy and respecting user wishes is very important, we would like to make doubly sure we register all related changes.

In most cases these requests can be served by reverse proxies and should not cause too much load. But definitely something to keep in mind and watch out for. I opened an issue with some ideas: #42
